#summary The dcterms:Location class

= The dcterms:Location class=

The dcterms:Location class is imported directly into darwin-sw (DSW).

==Vocabularies suitable for use as properties of instances of the Location class==

By design, it is intended that resources described by darwin-sw have properties that are terms in the DwC standard.  It seems clear that the terms listed under the dcterms:Location class in the DwC standard^1^ are all appropriate for use as properties of resources typed as Locations in darwin-sw.  

However, many of the DwC terms are not in widespread use.  Because of the widespread use of GPS technology, the terms geo:lat and geo:long (namespace http://www.w3.org/2003/01/geo/wgs84_pos# abbreviated geo:)^2^ have recently come into common use.  (The geo: terms assume the geodetic datum used by gps: WGS84.)  Applications outside of the biodiversity informatics community are more likely to "understand" these terms than the corresponding DwC terms.  In recognition of this there is currently (April 2011) a proposal to add these terms to the DwC standard.  Thus it seems appropriate that these terms be used to describe resources in the Location class.

It has also been suggested that a recently proposed "geo:" URI scheme^4^ would be appropriate for a fully semantic RDF version of Darwin Core^5^ ^6^.  Since these URIs are not HTTP URIs, their usefulness would be dependent on how widespread their acceptance becomes and how commonly consuming applications would know how to interpret them.  

^1^ http://rs.tdwg.org/dwc/terms/index.htm

^2^ http://www.w3.org/2003/01/geo/

^3^ http://code.google.com/p/darwincore/issues/detail?id=82

^4^ http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5870

^5^ http://lists.tdwg.org/pipermail/tdwg-content/2010-October/001609.html

^6^ http://lists.tdwg.org/pipermail/tdwg-content/2010-November/002045.html

==DwC terms suitable for use as properties in DSW (not a complete list)==

===Data properties===
 * *dwc:decimalLatitude*  can use *geo:lat* instead if geodetic reference datum is  WGS84
 * *dwc:decimalLongitude*  Can use *geo:long* instead if if geodetic reference datum is  WGS84
 * *dwc:minimumElevationInMeters* and *maximumElevationInMeters*  Can both be replaced by a single value for *geo:alt*
 * *dwc:geodeticDatum*  Note: not necessary with geo: terms
 * *dwc:coordinateUncertaintyInMeters*  Suitable term for indicating uncertainty in latitude and longitude
 * *dwc:locationRemarks* text literal
 * *dwc:georeferenceRemarks* text literal
 * *dwc:georeferencedBy* text literal form, use georefBy for object property
 * *dwc:countryCode* ISO 3166-1-alpha-2 country codes (text literal)
 * *dwc:stateProvince* unabbreviated text literal
 * *dwc:county* unabbreviated text literal
 * *dwc:locality* text literal

==DSW terms ==

===Object properties===

 * *dsw:georefBy* range FOAF entities (e.g. a *foaf:Person*)
 * *dsw:locates* range [ClassEvent dwc:Event]
 
