#summary Conventions and rules for collaboration

= Collaboration =

== Ontology files ==

It is expected that most people will use an ontology editor (like [http://protege.stanford.edu/ Protege] to edit the ontologies, so these files:

  * Should be saved as RDF/XML 
  * Should not include hand-written comments

== Conversation ==

=== Building the ontology ===

Each Class and Property should get a Wiki page of its own, where basic issues are reviewed and documented.

=== Discussion and criticism ===

We can either add comments to the Wiki pages or add Issues for major discussion items.  The latter would allow the Wiki pages to look tidier, and would allow a particular thread to be followed more easily and 'closed' when resolved.  However, localizing comments on their associated Wiki page will probably be more efficient.  

Note that Issues and Comments are not entered as data into the SVN system, so will be harder to backup and extract.  Any major contributions should be added as Wiki text.

== SVN access ==

All source files and wiki files can be accessed and edited via an SVN client.  For first checkout:

{{{
$ svn checkout https://darwin-sw.googlecode.com/svn/ darwin-sw --username foo.bar
}}}

This will make a directory called `darwin-sw` under SVN control.  It will include the contents of the wiki.  The standard work cycle is:

{{{
$ cd .../darwin-sw
$ svn update
... edit files
$ svn add foo  # for any new files
$ svn ci -m "An informative comment"
}}}

You will be asked for a username (`foo.bar` if you are `foo.bar@gmail.com`) and password (obtained via your googlecode settings page; _not_ your main gmail password). 