#summary Goals and design principles for this project

= Goals =

  * Develop a vocabulary and simple ontology for sharing biodiversity data on the semantic web
  * Initially focused more on Linked Open Data applications than machine reasoning, but (hopefully) making design choices that do not constrain full SW reasoning downstream 
  * To only using DwC terms and classes unless there is something really fundamental that is missing

== Design principles ==

# If a DwC (or DC) Class exists, for (essentially) the same concept that we are using, we will use the same Class name, and the DwC or DC namespace.
# In DwC, superclasses (Occurrence, Event, dcterms:Location, !GeologicalContext, Identification, Taxon) are related via resourceID and relatedResourceID.  These method of linking is one we are superseding with new dsw namespace properties, which will have an explicit domain and range.
# New concepts that we think are fundamental to the SW-ization of DwC will be added as new Classes with new linking properties (with domain and range specified). E.g. Individual.
# We propose a re-conceptualization of Occurrence to be not the physical or digital record of the Organism, but the abstract presence of the organism in space and time.  These Occurrences are recorded(hasEvidence) by a range of tokens.  We do not establish a token class, but create, or import Classes of, e.g., Specimen, !DigitalStillImage,Observation..., and specify them as being the range of hasEvidence.
# We will avoid using the http://rs.tdwg.org/ontology/voc/ because the purpose and permanence of this VOC has not been established(correct?).  This means we need to re-create several classes such as Specimen.
# For the numerous object and data properties in DwC, we neither specify domains or ranges, but add a comment in our ontology about suggested domain, and suggested data type of range (e.g.,   dwc:eventDate, dwc:identifiedBy
# In accordance with LOD principles, we expect all resources referred to to have URIs.
